=== Page 1 ===
(blank)


=== Page 2 ===
AUTOSAR Fundamentals
and Applications
Establishing a solid foundation for automotive
software design with AUTOSAR
Hossam Soffar


=== Page 3 ===
AUTOSAR Fundamentals and Applications
Copyright © 2024 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case
of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information
presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express
or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable
for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and
products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Group Product Manager: Preet Ahuja
Publishing Product Manager: Surbhi Suman
Book Project Manager: Ashwin Dinesh Kharwa
Senior Editor: Apramit Bhattacharya
Technical Editor: Nithik Cheruvakodan
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Proofreader: Apramit Bhattacharya
Indexer: Rekha Nair
Production Designer: Nilesh Mohite
DevRel Marketing Coordinator: Rohan Dobhal
First published: December 2024
Production reference: 1221124
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK
ISBN 978-1-80512-087-2
www.packtpub.com


=== Page 4 ===
This book is humbly dedicated to all the extraordinary individuals who have supported and inspired
me throughout my journey. To my beloved family: your unwavering love and encouragement have
been the foundation of all my endeavors. Thank you for your endless support and belief in me.
To my colleagues, past and present, from Valeo Egypt, Elektrobit, FEV, and now Plus AI: your
creativity, dedication, and collaboration have been invaluable. Working alongside such talented and
innovative minds has been a true privilege, and I am grateful for every moment we have shared. You
have taught me countless lessons and enriched my career in ways I could never have imagined.
I also dedicate this book to all the unfortunate souls in the world. May you find peace and justice one
day. Your resilience and strength inspire us to strive for a better, more equitable world.


=== Page 5 ===
Contributors
About the author
Hossam Soffar is a seasoned automotive embedded software engineer with over 12 years of experience
in the automotive software industry. He has acquired substantial expertise in AUTOSAR through his
roles in development and consulting for automotive ECUs, collaborating with an extensive network
of OEMs and Tier 1 and Tier 2 suppliers. He has been involved in debugging embedded software,
establishing software architectures, improving software performance, and managing software
requirements and architectural design, with a particular focus on safety, security, and real-time
performance. Committed to lifelong learning, Hossam values the opportunity to share his knowledge
and insights with colleagues and peers in the field.


=== Page 6 ===
About the reviewers
Shriram Gobichettipalayam Ramalingam is an automotive embedded software architecture
specialist with 14+ years of experience in the automotive domain. He has contributed to designing
in-vehicle network architecture, classic and adaptive AUTOSAR software stack configuration, and
the development of various OEMs.
I would like to thank my manager, Mr. Sandeep, who motivated me to expand my experience beyond
work. Thank you for breaking stereotypes and being understanding and supportive in all activities.
Dan Stroud is a senior solutions architect for AWS, specializing in the automotive sector. He gained
his CEng in 2016 and has an MSc in systems engineering management (UCL) and a BSc in software
engineering (University of Portsmouth). His 17+ years of experience in software development and
architecture includes flight controls architecture (777x), leading the design of a new EV platform
architecture for an automotive OEM, heavily focused around the AUTOSAR framework, and now
specializing in helping automotive customers to deliver connected features and accelerate innovation
through the cloud.
The automotive industry has seen a fundamental shift, with innovation now being driven by software.
With resources limited and expectations high, it’s technologies such as AUTOSAR that allow developers
to focus on features, rather than re-inventing the platform wheel. I feel privileged to have experienced
this as an OEM and I’m excited to see how connectivity and the power of the cloud drive the next cycle
of innovation.
Alaa Mahran is a senior embedded software engineer with over 10 years of experience in automotive
software, specializing in AUTOSAR. He currently works at Webasto SE, where he leads software
architecture and bootloader development, focusing on safety-critical and cybersecurity-compliant
projects. Alaa has also worked with Valeo on ADAS applications, contributing to enhancing automotive
safety and driver assistance features.
I want to express my appreciation for my father, who taught me to keep an eye out for details and strive
for excellence and continuous improvement.


=== Page 7 ===
(blank)


=== Page 8 ===
Table of Contents
Preface xiii
Part 1: Introduction – The Genesis and Framework
of AUTOSAR
1
Exploring the Genesis and Objectives of AUTOSAR 3
Evolution of the automotive industry 3 Case study – Developing an ECU in the
AUTOSAR framework 13
What is an ECU? 5
Introducing automotive software development 6 Understanding the AUTOSAR
Understanding traditional software development 7 standards 13
Case study – Replacing an MCU and Software architecture and design 17
exchanging microcontroller drivers 9
Layers 17
Introducing the AUTOSAR framework 9 Stacks 19
Impact on traditional software development 11
Summary 20
How were these goals achieved? 12
Questions 21
2
Introducing the AUTOSAR Software Layers 23
Understanding layered software Understanding the function of the RTE 28
architecture in AUTOSAR 24
Basic software layer 31
Application layer 25
Service layer 31
Runtime environment 27
ECU abstraction layer 33
Understanding the VFB concept 27 Microcontroller abstraction layer 34


=== Page 9 ===
viii Table of Contents
Complex drivers 36 BSW – Service layer 40
BSW – ECU abstraction layer 41
Interfaces 37
BSW – MCAL 41
Case study – Developing a BMS ECU 39
Summary 42
Application layer 40
RTE 40 Exercise 42
3
AUTOSAR Methodology and Data Exchange Formats 43
Introducing the AUTOSAR Code Generation 49
methodology 43
Using templates for data exchange 51
Understanding the AUTOSAR
Conformance classes for AUTOSAR 54
methodology 45
Summary 54
System Configuration 45
Exercise 55
ECU Configuration 48
Part 2: Investigating the Building Blocks
of AUTOSAR
4
Working with Software Components and RTE 59
Understanding SWCs 60 Introducing compositions 73
Example – Throttle controller 61 Connector types 74
Types of AUTOSAR SWCs 62 Understanding the significance of the
Elements of SWC 63 RTE 76
Exploring AUTOSAR datatypes 67 Generation of RTE 77
Modeling an SWC 69 Summary 81
What is an AUTOSAR authoring tool? 69 Questions 82
Communication between the SWCs 72


=== Page 10 ===
Table of Contents ix
5
Designing and Implementing Events and Interfaces 83
Introducing the communication model 83 How do ports, interfaces, and events interact
with each other? 103
Explaining the information flow 84
Events for temperature monitoring example 108
Sender-receiver communication 87
Client-server communication 95 Summary 109
Rethinking temperature sensor design 100
Questions 109
Understanding events in AUTOSAR 102
6
Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System 111
A brief overview of the AUTOSAR OS 111 Interrupts 119
Introduction to real-time operating systems 112 Events 120
Introduction to OSEK 113 Scheduling 122
Configuring the AUTOSAR OS 114 Task trigger mechanisms 124
OS resources 128
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS
Hooks 129
architecture 115
Summary 130
Tasks 116
Questions 131
7
Exploring the Communication Stack 133
What is the COM stack? 134 Network management 157
COM stack overview 134 Key modules in network management 157
An overview of basic COM concepts 137 Summary 160
COM module 141
Questions 160
PDU-Router (PduR) Module 149
CAN modules 151
Exploring an example of sending a CAN
message 154


=== Page 11 ===
x Table of Contents
Part 3: Beyond Fundamentals – Advanced
AUTOSAR Concepts
8
Securing the AUTOSAR System with Crypto and Security Stack 163
Introduction to automotive security 163 Crypto module 171
Fundamentals of automotive security 164 Other helper modules to achieve security 173
Security in AUTOSAR 165 Crypto Stack use cases and examples 174
Differentiating between safety and security 166 Data encryption 174
Security stack architecture in Secure communication 177
AUTOSAR 167 Secure diagnostics 179
Secure boot in AUTOSAR 180
Cryptographic techniques 167
Crypto service manager module 169 Summary 182
Crypto Interface module 171 Questions 182
9
Dealing with Memory and Mode Management 183
Memory stack in AUTOSAR 184 Mode management 192
Significance of non-volatile memory in Role and functionality 192
AUTOSAR 184 Use case for the BSWM – Vehicle
Understanding the memory stack 184 shutdown process 196
Storage objects 186
Summary 198
Use case 190
Questions 198
10
Wrapping Up and Extending Knowledge with a Use Case 199
Overview of diagnostics 200 Default Error Tracer (DET) 204
Diagnostic Communication Manager (DCM) Failure Management 205
in detail 201
Overview of time synchronization 206
Diagnostic Event Manager 202


=== Page 12 ===
Table of Contents xi
Synchronized Time-Base Manager What’s next? 213
(StbM) module 207 Case study – Development of an
CAN Time Synchronization (CanTSyn) 209 autonomous parking assist system 214
How to read the standards 210 Application layer (SWCs) 217
Key AUTOSAR documents 211 AUTOSAR BSW modules 218
Summary 219
Index 221
Other Books You May Enjoy 232


=== Page 13 ===
(blank)


=== Page 14 ===
Preface
Embedded software teams use the AUTOSAR framework to standardize interfaces between application
software and basic vehicular functions. This standardization helps develop and deploy software
rapidly and efficiently for automotive electronic control units (ECUs) and ensures more effective
project management.
Many engineers find AUTOSAR challenging due to its complexity owing to the difficulty of grasping
its concepts at the beginning. The intricate architecture and extensive standards can lead to confusion,
making it hard for beginners to see the full picture and understand how everything fits together.
Additionally, beginner-friendly resources are limited. This book addresses these challenges with clear
explanations, key concepts, and practical advice to help beginners and intermediate-level engineers
confidently navigate the AUTOSAR landscape.
Automotive ECUs are safety-critical and hard real-time systems, and this book will provide you
with the foundational knowledge and skills needed to participate in their development and manage
AUTOSAR projects more effectively.
With a focus on the practical application of AUTOSAR, this book dives deep into the AUTOSAR
framework and architecture and shows how to implement it in the development of automotive electronic
systems using best practices and real-world use cases.
The book begins with an overview of the goals and objectives of AUTOSAR and then discusses its
layered architecture, including the different AUTOSAR stacks, components and modules, and internal
and external communication mechanisms. You’ll discover how to configure, design, and integrate
AUTOSAR software components in a run-time environment (RTE) and understand the principles
of diagnostics, security, and real-time operating system (RTOS) for developing high-quality, secure,
and efficient ECUs.
After reading this book, you’ll have detailed insights into AUTOSAR and be skilled in building,
implementing, and managing complex automotive systems confidently and efficiently.
Who this book is for
This book is designed for embedded software engineers and any software developer or software
architect who works with or plans to work with automotive systems but has minimal or no knowledge
of AUTOSAR. It serves as a valuable reference for project managers, students, and researchers who
seek to learn about AUTOSAR and its applications or understand its main concepts. A background
knowledge of software development processes and C programming will be beneficial.


=== Page 15 ===
xiv Preface
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Exploring the Genesis and Objectives of AUTOSAR, introduces the origins and goals of the
AUTOSAR standard. It explains the foundational principles and motivations behind its development,
offering a comprehensive understanding of its objectives.
Chapter 2, Introducing the AUTOSAR Software Layers, explores the essential layers of AUTOSAR
architecture, including the application layer, RTE, service layer, ECU abstraction layer, and MCAL.
It highlights the design and implementation of modular and compatible software components, using
a BMS ECU as a case study to illustrate practical applications. This chapter provides foundational
knowledge for understanding how these layers interact and support automotive software development.
Chapter 3, AUTOSAR Methodology and Data Exchange Formats, outlines the AUTOSAR development
methodology, emphasizing the independence of software component implementation from ECU
configuration. It introduces AUTOSAR templates for data exchange and covers system design,
modeling, code generation, and configuration. The chapter also explains conformance classes, detailing
the essential BSW modules required for compliance.
Chapter 4, Working with Software Components and RTE, explores the structure, functionality, and types
of AUTOSAR software components, including application software components and complex device
drivers. It explains software component communication via ports, the role of runnable entities, and
triggering conditions. The chapter also highlights the importance of the runtime environment and
its connection with the virtual function bus (VFB), providing a foundation for developing complex
automotive systems.
Chapter 5, Designing and Implementing Events and Interfaces, unravels the complexities of events
and interfaces in the AUTOSAR framework. It emphasizes their role in data transitions, real-time
responses, and safety. The chapter covers advanced communication models, including sender-receiver
and client-server interfaces, and synchronous versus asynchronous communication, using a car’s
temperature monitoring system as an example.
Chapter 6, Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System, examines the AUTOSAR operating
system (OS), its architecture, RTOS, and the OSEK standard. It highlights priority-based scheduling,
fast interrupt processing, and inter-task communication. The chapter also covers task management,
synchronization, and resource allocation, providing essential knowledge for developing efficient and
reliable automotive software systems.
Chapter 7, Exploring the Communication Stack, covers the COM module’s role in data exchange, the
significance of signals, and the PDUR module’s function in routing and transforming data. Using
the CAN stack as an example, it provides insights into the key components and mechanisms of
AUTOSAR communication.


=== Page 16 ===
Preface xv
Chapter 8, Securing the AUTOSAR System with Crypto and Security Stack, focuses on automotive
cybersecurity within the AUTOSAR framework. It highlights the importance of security and potential
risks. The chapter explores the AUTOSAR crypto stack, including its core components and their roles
in cryptographic operations. It also covers Secure Onboard Communication (SecOC) for ensuring
data confidentiality and integrity between ECUs, emphasizing the importance of secure coding
practices and regulatory compliance.
Chapter 9, Dealing with Memory and Mode Management, covers the architecture and functionalities of
the NVM stack, focusing on data storage and retrieval through the Non-Volatile Memory Manager
(NVMM) module. It provides practical insights into configuring NVM, discussing storage objects,
block management, and error handling. Additionally, it discusses Basic Software Mode Management
(BSWM), illustrating its role in managing different operating modes within automotive ECUs to
ensure seamless operation and reliability.
Chapter 10, Wrapping Up and Extending Knowledge with a Use Case, concludes our exploration of
AUTOSAR, emphasizing its importance in automotive software engineering. It recaps key concepts,
including AUTOSAR architecture, SWS, TPS, RS, RTE, and BSW specifications, and presents a use
case for designing a real-time control system within an automotive ECU. This chapter serves as a
foundation, encouraging engineers to continue studying AUTOSAR specifications, gain hands-on
experience, and stay updated with industry trends to master this powerful standard.
To get the most out of this book
You should have a basic understanding of automotive software development and embedded systems.
Familiarity with RTOS and general software engineering principles will be beneficial. Additionally, a
foundational knowledge of communication protocols and basic cybersecurity concepts will help in
grasping the more advanced topics covered in the chapters.
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself. Doing so
will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames,
file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example:
“The function then reads a value and stores it in the receivedData variable.”


=== Page 17 ===
xvi Preface
A block of code is set as follows:
#include "Rte_Receiver.h"
void ReceiverCounterFunction(void) {
UInt32 receivedData;
Rte_Read_ReceiverInterface_ReceiverInput(&receivedData);
// Process received data, e.g., control an actuator based on the
input
// In this example only odd counter value is sent
if (receivedData % 2) {
Rte_Write_ReciverModule_CounterSig(receivedData)
}
}
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance, words in
menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: “AUTomotive Open System ARchitecture
(AUTOSAR) is a standard for the development of automotive electronic systems. “
Tips or important notes
Appear like this.
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at customercare@
packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please
visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would
be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you
are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com


=== Page 18 ===
Preface xvii
Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read AUTOSAR Fundamentals and Applications, we’d love to hear your thoughts! Please
click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.


=== Page 19 ===
xviii Preface
Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below
https://packt.link/free-ebook/978-1-80512-087-2
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly


=== Page 20 ===
Part 1:
Introduction – The Genesis
and Framework of AUTOSAR
This part provides a foundational understanding of AUTOSAR, its origins, and its layered architecture.
It introduces the key principles, motivations, and methodologies that underpin the AUTOSAR
framework, offering insights into how data exchange formats facilitate seamless communication
within the system. You will gain a solid grasp of the fundamental concepts necessary for developing
AUTOSAR-compliant automotive software.
This part has the following chapters:
• Chapter 1, Exploring the Genesis and Objectives of AUTOSAR
• Chapter 2, Introducing the AUTOSAR Software Layers
• Chapter 3, AUTOSAR Methodology and Data Exchange Formats


=== Page 21 ===
(blank)


=== Page 22 ===
1
Exploring the Genesis and
Objectives of AUTOSAR
AUTomotive Open System ARchitecture (AUTOSAR) is a standard for the development of automotive
electronic systems. It provides a common software architecture for electronic control units (ECUs)
in vehicles, allowing for the easier integration and development of new features. It is a partnership of
major automotive manufacturers and suppliers, and its goal is to improve the overall efficiency and
flexibility of the automotive software development process.
In this first chapter, we will discuss the motivation behind the development of AUTOSAR, the organization
of the partnership, and its aims and objectives. In this chapter, we will cover the following main topics:
• Evolution of the automotive industry
• Introducing the AUTOSAR framework
• Understanding the AUTOSAR standards
• Software architecture and design
Evolution of the automotive industry
Over the past few decades, the automobile industry has evolved from a simple means of transportation
to a complex machine that resembles a smartphone on wheels. This transformation is due to the
integration of advanced technologies and the adoption of a more sophisticated approach to design
and development.

