=== Page 131 ===
112 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
The AUTOSAR OS is positioned strategically within the AUTOSAR stack, interacting closely with
all basic software (BSW) layers, managing and utilizing the hardware (HW) directly if needed. Let’s
take a look at the structure again:
Figure 6.1 – The AUTOSAR OS in AUTOSAR architecure
The upcoming sections provide essential insights into the significance of real-time operating systems
(RTOS) in embedded systems and the evolution of the Offene Systeme und deren Schnittstellen
für die Elektronik in Kraftfahrzeugen/Vehicle Distributed Executive (OSEK/VDX) standard,
which laid the foundation for the development of the AUTOSAR OS. Let’s delve into these topics to
understand the critical role of RTOS and the seamless integration of automotive software applications
within the AUTOSAR framework.
Introduction to real-time operating systems
RTOS are specialized OS designed for embedded systems that require precise timing and deterministic
behavior. Unlike general-purpose OS that prioritize maximizing throughput and user interactivity,
an RTOS is engineered to provide predictability and ensure specific tasks are executed within strict
time constraints. It excels at managing time and system resources accurately, delivering rapid response
times to critical events.
The key difference between an RTOS and a regular OS lies in their primary focus. While a regular
OS aims to provide a wide range of functionalities and services for diverse applications, an RTOS
prioritizes deterministic behavior and real-time responsiveness. It guarantees that system tasks,
particularly those with critical timing requirements, are executed within their designated time limits.


=== Page 132 ===
A brief overview of the AUTOSAR OS 113
This unique characteristic makes RTOS crucial for systems where timing is critical, such as automotive
control units. In the automotive industry, real-time performance requirements and absolute reliability
are essential. Vehicles incorporate numerous ECUs that must seamlessly interact with one another, and
safety-critical functions, such as how braking and engine control rely on precise timing and deterministic
behavior. In the automotive industry, an RTOS is essential due to real-time performance requirements
and absolute reliability. Modern vehicles incorporate numerous ECUs that must seamlessly interact
with one another. In addition, safety-critical functions, such as braking, engine control, advanced
driver assistance systems (ADAS), and others necessitate real-time operations to ensure safety and
optimal performance. An RTOS, such as the AUTOSAR OS, provides the necessary features and
services for these operations, including priority-based scheduling, fast interrupt processing, and
inter-task communication and synchronization mechanisms and this has to be achieved within a
small and deterministic memory footprint.
Now that we have explored the importance and unique characteristics of RTOS, let’s explore the
connection between RTOS and the OSEK/VDX standard, which played a significant role in establishing
a consistent software architecture for ECUs in vehicles. We will explore how the foundational principles
of the OSEK standard were adopted and further developed in the AUTOSAR OS to accommodate
the evolving complexities of automotive software applications.
Introduction to OSEK
Emerging in the 1990s, the OSEK/VDX standard represented an automotive industry-led initiative.
Its purpose was to create a consistent software architecture applicable across the multitude of ECUs
deployed within a vehicle. With the advent of the AUTOSAR OS, the foundational principles of the
OSEK standard were adopted and further developed to accommodate the evolving intricacies of
automotive software applications.
Building on the groundwork laid by the OSEK OS standard, the AUTOSAR OS was designed for the
particular needs of automotive control units. This included understanding and addressing automotive
applications’ unique constraints and real-time necessities. Essential features, such as preemptive and
non-preemptive scheduling, were implemented for effective task management, promoting the optimal
utilization of processing resources. In addition, strategies for resource management were integrated to
mitigate challenges, such as priority inversion, a situation where lower-priority tasks might obstruct
the completion of higher-priority ones. The AUTOSAR OS also incorporated mechanisms for event-
driven task synchronization, delivering a more agile and efficient system for coordinating multiple tasks.
The AUTOSAR OS further enhances system performance through features such as support for multiple
cores and flexible scheduling policies, enabling concurrent execution of tasks on distinct cores. It
also upholds the principle of stack monitoring, a tool used to identify and prevent stack overflows,
a frequent issue in real-time and embedded systems. Thus, the AUTOSAR OS builds on and extends
the OSEK/VDX standard, effectively catering to the growing complexity and requirements of present
and upcoming automotive software applications.


=== Page 133 ===
114 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
The following figure depicts the OS as the central engine of a computer system, illustrating its interactions
with various modules and its relationship to driver layers:
Figure 6.2 – Role of OS in an embedded software
The AUTOSAR OS configuration is a crucial step in the overall methodology, particularly during system
integration. It involves configuring and integrating software components, the run-time environment
(RTE), BSW modules, and the AUTOSAR OS itself.
Configuring the AUTOSAR OS
The configuration of the AUTOSAR OS happens during the integration phase of the AUTOSAR
methodology. The configuration of the OS is crucial because it determines how it will manage system
resources, handle interrupts, schedule tasks, and communicate with software components.
The AUTOSAR OS is closely related to the RTE, a middleware layer that enables communication
between software components. These software components are typically developed independently
and need a common way to communicate and exchange data. The RTE provides this capability and
uses the services of the AUTOSAR OS to do so.
Software components, RTE, BSW modules, and the AUTOSAR OS are configured and integrated. The
RTE generates a description file for each software component, outlining its interfaces and behavior.
This information is used to generate the appropriate communication mechanisms (such as sending/
receiving functions). The RTE also interacts with BSW modules, implementing low-level, hardware-
dependent functionality, such as communication protocols and I/O management. BSW modules, as
well as the OS, are configured based on the system requirements.


=== Page 134 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 115
The following figure provides a visual representation of the OS configuration step within the AUTOSAR
methodology, showcasing the process of configuring and integrating the OS and software components
in an ECU:
Figure 6.3 – Configuring the AUTOSAR OS
Now that you are familiar with what the AUTOSAR OS is, let’s delve deeper into its architecture.
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture
The AUTOSAR OS consists of several interconnected objects, each serving a specific purpose in
managing the system resources and providing services to the software applications. These objects
include the following:
• Tasks: In the AUTOSAR OS, tasks form the fundamental building blocks of execution.
Essentially, these tasks are C functions invoked by the OS. They are distinct software elements
that carry out specific functions and operate in a predetermined sequence, often activated by
particular events or stimuli.
• Alarms: Alarms are time-based triggers that can be used to schedule the execution of tasks or
activate events at specific points in time. They enable the AUTOSAR OS to implement time-
driven behavior and meet strict timing requirements.


=== Page 135 ===
116 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
• Events: Events represent occurrences or conditions that can trigger the execution of tasks.
Further, tasks, interruptions, or other system components can in turn generate events.
• Services: Services are pre-defined functions provided by the AUTOSAR OS to facilitate common
operations, such as inter-task communication, memory management, and timing services.
They offer a standardized interface for software components to access the OS functionality.
• Scheduling: The AUTOSAR OS includes a scheduling mechanism that determines the order and
priority of task execution. It ensures that tasks with higher priority are executed before lower-
priority tasks, enabling the system to meet timing requirements and guarantee real-time behavior.
• Resources: Resources are shared entities that multiple tasks can access and manage. They include
hardware peripherals, memory, communication channels, and timers. The AUTOSAR OS
provides mechanisms for controlling access to these resources, ensuring proper synchronization,
and preventing conflicts.
Having provided a brief overview of the OS objects, let us now explore each component more deeply.
Tasks
The AUTOSAR OS offers two distinct task concepts for effectively subdividing and executing complex
control software based on real-time requirements: basic tasks and extended tasks. By implementing
tasks, the software can be conveniently divided into manageable parts, each with its framework for
executing functions. In addition, the OS enables concurrent and asynchronous execution of these
tasks, and the scheduler ensures an organized sequence of task execution.
Let’s explore these two types of tasks in greater detail.
Basic tasks
Basic tasks only release the processor when certain conditions are met. These conditions include
the following:
• The task terminating
• The OS switching to a higher-priority task
• The occurrence of an interrupt that triggers the processor to switch to an interrupt service
routine (ISR)


=== Page 136 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 117
Let’s look at the task state model of a basic task. The task state model consists of a state machine that
governs the behavior of tasks within the AUTOSAR framework. The following figure shows the state
model for a basic task:
Figure 6.4 – Basic task state machine
Let’s explore the components shown here:
• Running: When a task is running, the CPU is actively executing the instructions of that
particular task within the embedded system. For instance, if you have an embedded system
controlling the engine of a car, the task associated with the engine control module is actively
running, continuously monitoring and controlling various engine parameters to ensure optimal
performance and efficiency.
• Suspended: When a task is suspended, it is temporarily paused and not executed by the CPU.
For example, this could happen when another task takes priority or when the task voluntarily
yields control.
• Ready: A task in the ready state is prepared to be executed by the CPU but is currently waiting
for its turn. The task is loaded into memory, and all its necessary resources are allocated.
To summarize the example, during normal driving, the engine management task remains running,
continuously optimizing engine performance. However, if a potential collision is detected, the engine
management task may be suspended temporarily to prioritize collision avoidance. Meanwhile, the
braking task stays ready, monitoring inputs and waiting for the driver’s command or an event that
requires braking intervention.
It’s important to note that in real automotive systems, numerous tasks may handle different functions
simultaneously, and their states can dynamically change based on system requirements, priorities,
and events.


=== Page 137 ===
118 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
Extended tasks
Extended tasks in the AUTOSAR framework provide added functionality compared to basic tasks.
They have the capability to utilize the OS’s WaitEvent call, enabling them to enter a waiting state.
This waiting state allows the processor to be released and assigned to a lower-priority task without
terminating the currently running extended task. However, the management of extended tasks is more
complex for the OS, requiring additional system resources compared to basic tasks.
The states of an extended task are analogous to those of a basic task, with the inclusion of an additional
state known as the waiting state, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 6.5 – Basic task state machine
The waiting state is an extended task-specific state in OS. In this state, a task is waiting for a particular
event, condition, or resource before it can proceed with its execution. The task remains in the waiting
state until the expected event or condition occurs, at which point it can transition to the running state
to continue its operations.
In our example, in the embedded automotive domain, extended tasks can have additional states, such
as waiting and blocked. The sensor data processing task runs continuously, the communication task
may be suspended temporarily in case of errors, the diagnostics task waits for trigger events, the input
handling task waits for user input, and a task can be blocked if it requires exclusive access to a shared
resource. These extended states allow for more nuanced control and coordination of tasks within the
embedded automotive system.


=== Page 138 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 119
Interrupts play a crucial role in handling time-critical events and ensuring timely responsiveness within
the automotive software system. In the next section, we will dive into the concept of interrupts, their
types, and how they are managed within the AUTOSAR framework.
Interrupts
In embedded development, interrupts refer to signals or events that pause the normal execution of a
program and temporarily transfer control to a specific section of code called an ISR. Interrupts are a
fundamental mechanism for handling time-sensitive events and external interactions in embedded systems.
When an interrupt occurs, it interrupts the current execution of the program and diverts the processor’s
attention to the ISR associated with that particular interrupt. As a result, the ISR performs the necessary
actions to respond to the event or signal, such as reading sensor data, servicing a hardware device,
or handling an external input.
Interrupts are essential in embedded development, enabling efficient handling of time-sensitive
events, responsiveness to external stimuli, and multitasking capabilities in embedded systems. They
help ensure the system’s stability, real-time performance, and effective utilization of system resources.
In the AUTOSAR OS, the functions for processing an interrupt are subdivided into two ISR categories:
• ISR category 1: ISRs in this category operate independently of OS services. Once the ISR
completes its execution, processing resumes precisely from the instruction where the interrupt
originated. This implies that the interrupt does not impact task management. Such ISRs have
minimal overhead and operate efficiently within the system.
• ISR category 2: ISRs in this category interact with the OS. Once an ISR in category 2 finishes
execution, the OS may perform a task switch or adjust task priorities. This is because category
2 ISRs can invoke OS services, such as activating tasks or setting events.


=== Page 139 ===
120 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
The following figure illustrates the presence of these two types of ISRs:
Figure 6.6 – ISR categories
In category 1 ISRs, they are not managed by the OS and operate independently. On the other hand,
category 2 ISRs are managed by the OS through an OS frame. This differentiation allows for distinct
handling and management of ISRs based on their type within the AUTOSAR framework.
Events
In the AUTOSAR OS, events are signaling mechanisms that provide vital cues to extended tasks about
various state changes or happenings within the system. Essentially OS-managed entities, these events
are closely linked to extended tasks, not as standalone elements but as auxiliary objects that complement
these tasks. Each extended task is associated with a distinct set of events, effectively becoming the
proprietor of these events. Events in AUTOSAR are characterized by two key attributes: the owning
task and the unique identifier, often referred to as the name or mask. After activating an extended
task, the OS systematically clears the related events, thereby readying them for their next assignment.
Events serve as conduits for binary communication, encapsulating various types of information, such
as a timer’s expiration, availability of a resource, and reception of a message, among other system-


=== Page 140 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 121
level occurrences. Therefore, the utility of events is pivotal in managing non-periodic situations that
warrant an immediate response.
AUTOSAR’s communication model is deeply rooted in this event-centric design, primarily aimed at
fostering efficient task synchronization and communication in real-time environments. An event can
be linked with multiple tasks, while a task can await several events. When a task is in a waiting state
for a certain event, it remains blocked until the event is set, enabling precise coordination among
other system-level occurrences. Therefore, the utility of events is pivotal in managing non-periodic
situations that warrant an immediate response.
The AUTOSAR OS provides API functions for managing and manipulating events. These functions
include the following:
• SetEvent: This function can be used to set an event for a particular task. When the event is
set, the task waiting for this event will be unblocked and ready for execution.
• ClearEvent: This function is used to clear a specified event for a task.
• WaitEvent: This function blocks the execution of the calling task until one of its events is set.
• GetEvent: This function reads the currently pending events of a task.
Let’s consider an example where we have two tasks, Task1 and Task2. Task1 sets an event
(Event1), and Task2 waits for this event to occur:
#define Event1 0x01
TASK(Task1)
{
// ... Task1's processing ...
// Set the Event1 for Task2
SetEvent(Task2, Event1);
// Terminate Task1
TerminateTask();
}
TASK(Task2)
{
// Wait for the Event1
WaitEvent(Event1);
// If the execution reaches this point, it means Event1 occurred
// ... Task2's processing ...
// Clear the Event1
ClearEvent(Event1);
// Terminate Task2
TerminateTask();
}


=== Page 141 ===
122 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
In this example, Task2 uses the WaitEvent function to wait for Event1. Until Event1 is set,
Task2 remains in the waiting state. Task1 uses SetEvent to set Event1 when it completes
its processing. Once Event1 is set, Task2 moves from the waiting state to the ready state, and its
execution continues. After handling the event, Task2 uses ClearEvent to clear Event1 and
then terminates.
This mechanism allows tasks to synchronize their execution based on specific system states or
occurrences, thus enabling efficient real-time system management.
The following figure provides a visual representation of events in the AUTOSAR framework, showcasing
their setting, clearing, and sharing mechanisms among tasks or through the scheduler. It offers insights
into how events are utilized to facilitate communication and synchronization between various tasks
or executable entities:
Figure 6.7 – Events between tasks
In the next section, we will explore the scheduling mechanisms employed by the AUTOSAR OS to
ensure efficient task execution and resource allocation.
Scheduling
Scheduling in the AUTOSAR OS refers to the mechanism that determines the order and priority of
task execution within the system. It plays a crucial role in managing the allocation of processor time
and resources among different tasks, ensuring that the system meets its timing requirements and
achieves real-time behavior.
The AUTOSAR OS supports different scheduling policies based on the specific needs of the system.
Two common scheduling policies in AUTOSAR are as follows:
• Full preemptive scheduling: This type of scheduling enables a running task to be rescheduled
at any instruction based on pre-defined trigger conditions set by the OS. With full preemptive
scheduling, when a higher-priority task becomes ready for execution, the currently running
task is placed in the ready state, and its execution context is saved. The higher-priority task
is then scheduled and allowed to execute. This preemptive behavior ensures that tasks with


=== Page 142 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 123
higher priority are given immediate access to the processor, allowing critical tasks to meet
their timing requirements. Once the higher-priority task completes its execution or becomes
blocked, the previously preempted task can resume execution from the exact location where
it was preempted.
Figure 6.8 – Full preemptive scheduling
• Non-preemptive scheduling: The non-preemptive scheduling policy, also referred to as
cooperative scheduling, enables tasks to continue execution until they willingly give up control
or encounter explicit rescheduling points. In this policy, task switching occurs only through
explicitly defined system services or specific rescheduling points. Under non-preemptive
scheduling, a task retains control of the processor until it completes its execution, switches to
a higher-priority task, or an interrupt occurs that triggers the execution of an ISR. However,
non-preemptive scheduling imposes specific constraints on timing requirements. Notably, when
a lower-priority task enters a non-preemptable section, it can cause a delay in the execution of
higher-priority tasks until the next rescheduling point is reached.
Figure 6.9 – Non-preemptive scheduling


=== Page 143 ===
124 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
Timing protection is ensured through the scheduling policy implemented in AUTOSAR, which
incorporates a mechanism known as highest priority first. Under this policy, tasks with the same
priority are grouped together and placed in a first in, first out (FIFO) stack. These tasks share a
common resource. To maintain timing integrity, only one task within the group is allowed to occupy
the shared resource at a time. When a task completes its operation and releases the resource, the next
task in the FIFO stack can then acquire the released resource. This sequential access to the resource
prevents multiple tasks from concurrently accessing it and ensures orderly execution.
Importantly, the scheduling policy based on the highest priority first does not allow one task to preempt
another task within the same priority group. This means that tasks within a priority level are executed
in a cooperative manner, without interrupting each other. These preemption rules, combined with
the sequential access to shared resources, work together to provide timing protection for the system.
By adhering to these rules, the system can effectively meet all its timing requirements, ensuring the
timely execution of critical tasks and maintaining overall system reliability.
In the next section, we will delve into various task trigger mechanisms and their significance in
facilitating efficient task execution, event handling, and inter-task communication.
Task trigger mechanisms
In AUTOSAR, task trigger mechanisms are used to activate tasks based on specific conditions or
events. These mechanisms provide a way to initiate the execution of tasks in response to pre-defined
triggers. There are two common task trigger mechanisms used in AUTOSAR: alarms and schedule
tables. Let’s explore these in detail in the following sections.
Alarms
The AUTOSAR OS provides functionalities for handling repetitive events. These events can include
timers that generate interruptions at regular intervals, for example, triggering a timing event to the
application or generating an activation event to a task. Alarms are pivotal time-driven entities in the
AUTOSAR OS, designed to meet real-time systems’ timing demands. They are intimately tied to
counters, which are software timers that count in ticks. A tick can represent any time period, although,
in practice, it’s often set to match the OS’s scheduler tick. Counters can be incremented in different
ways, such as at fixed time intervals (system counter), via hardware interrupts (hardware counter), or
manually by application software (software counter). Using counters provides a mechanism to handle
time-based events. The relationship between counters and alarms is such that, when a counter hits a
predetermined count value, the associated alarm expires and performs a pre-defined action. These
actions primarily include the following:
• Activation of a task: Upon expiration, an alarm can activate a specific task. This allows for
precise scheduling of tasks and implementing time-based behavior in AUTOSAR applications.
For instance, a task could be activated every 100 milliseconds to check the status of a sensor.


=== Page 144 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 125
• Setting an event: An alarm can also set an event for a particular task when it expires. This provides
a way for tasks to synchronize their execution based on specific system states or occurrences.
The AUTOSAR OS oversees counters and associated alarms, ensuring that when a counter value
reaches a specific threshold, the corresponding alarm triggers the configured action. This mechanism
allows for efficient handling of timing requirements, resource optimization, and the implementation
of time-dependent behavior in automotive applications.
The following is a pseudocode example demonstrating how an alarm can be used:
#define ALARM_CYCLE 10
TASK(Task1)
{
// Task1 processing here
// Terminate Task1
TerminateTask();
}
void setup(void)
{
// Start the alarm; it will expire after ALARM_CYCLE counter ticks,
and then every ALARM_CYCLE ticks
SetRelAlarm(Alarm1, ALARM_CYCLE, ALARM_CYCLE);
}
void main(void)
{
setup();
while(1)
{
// Increment the counter
IncrementCounter(Counter1);
// Handle the alarms
AlarmCheck();
if (CheckAlarmExpired(Alarm1)) {
// Activate Task1 when Alarm1 expires
ActivateTask(Task1);
}
}
}


=== Page 145 ===
126 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
In this code, the SetRelAlarm function configures Alarm1 to start after the ALARM_CYCLE
counter ticks and to expire after every ALARM_CYCLE counter ticks. When the alarm expires, it
triggers the activation of Task1 in the main loop.
Next, let’s discuss schedule tables.
Schedule tables
Schedule tables in the AUTOSAR OS are advanced timing mechanisms that provide a powerful way
to define complex timing behaviors. They offer a higher level of abstraction than alarms and counters,
allowing the precise scheduling of tasks and the setting of events based on time.
A schedule table can be thought of as a timetable of actions. It consists of multiple steps, each step
corresponding to a point in time. When the time arrives for a specific step, the scheduled action (such
as the activation of a task or the setting of an event) takes place.
The following figure showcases schedule tables and expiry points, highlighting their significance in
orchestrating task execution and timing within the AUTOSAR framework. It emphasizes that each
expiry point can possess an offset, enabling the activation of tasks and the setting of events at specific
time instances:
Figure 6.10 – Schedule table example
The AUTOSAR OS supports both relative and synchronized schedule tables. Relative schedule tables
begin running as soon they are started, with the timing of each step relative to the start of the table.
Synchronized schedule tables, on the other hand, are synchronized to an external time source.
Synchronized schedule tables play a vital role in inter-ECU synchronization. Multiple ECUs in a vehicle
often need to coordinate their actions to achieve overall system objectives. For instance, different
ECUs controlling various aspects of engine management (fuel injection, spark timing, etc.) need to
act in a coordinated manner.


=== Page 146 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 127
The following pseudocode is a simplified example of how schedule tables can be used for this purpose.
Imagine we have two ECUs, ECU1 and ECU2, each running an instance of the AUTOSAR OS. ECU1
is the master, generating a synchronization signal every 100 milliseconds, and ECU2 is the slave,
needing to perform certain actions synchronized to this signal:
// On ECU1 (master)
#define SYNC_CYCLE 100 // Sync signal every 100 ms
TASK(SyncTask)
{
// Generate the sync signal
SendSyncSignal();
// Schedule the Task to run again in 100 ms
SetRelAlarm(SyncAlarm, SYNC_CYCLE, SYNC_CYCLE);
TerminateTask();
}
// On ECU2 (slave)
#define TABLE_START 0
#define TASK_STEP 50 // Task to be run 50 ms after receiving the
sync signal
TASK(SlaveTask)
{
// Do something here...
TerminateTask();
}
// When the sync signal is received...
void OnSyncSignalReceived(TickType syncTime)
{
// Synchronize the schedule table to the received sync signal
SyncScheduleTable(SlaveScheduleTable, syncTime);
}
In the preceding example, ECU1 generates a synchronization signal periodically using a task and
an alarm. Upon receiving the sync signal on ECU2, the SyncScheduleTable function is used
to synchronize the SlaveScheduleTable schedule table to the sync signal. This ensures that
SlaveTask is activated 50 ms after receiving the sync signal, synchronizing the task execution on
ECU2 to the actions on ECU1.


=== Page 147 ===
128 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
Through this, schedule tables in the AUTOSAR OS provide a powerful way to synchronize the operations
of different ECUs, facilitating complex, time-coordinated behaviors across the whole vehicle system.
Now, let’s shift our focus to OS resources; understanding how the OS manages and allocates resources
is crucial for ensuring the efficient utilization of system capabilities. In the next section, we will explore
the concept of OS resources and discuss their significance in the AUTOSAR framework.
OS resources
Resource management in the AUTOSAR OS plays an instrumental role in synchronizing shared
resource access across tasks with varying priorities. These resources can encompass a broad spectrum,
including scheduler management entities, sequential programs, memory regions, or specific hardware
areas. The resource management system is a requisite across all conformance classes and can optionally
be extended to include task and ISR coordination.
Let’s now look at OS resources within AUTOSAR that represent critical elements, such as CPU power,
memory, I/O devices, and communication channels:
Figure 6.11 – Shared resource between two tasks
The core principles of resource management in the AUTOSAR OS are as follows:
• Exclusive access: The system ensures that two tasks cannot occupy the same resource
simultaneously, preventing data inconsistency and corruption
• Priority inversion prevention: The AUTOSAR OS employs a priority inheritance protocol to
prevent priority inversion – a situation where a higher-priority task is blocked, waiting for a
lower-priority task holding a shared resource
• Deadlock avoidance: The OS ensures that deadlocks, situations where tasks mutually block
each other waiting for resources, do not occur
• Non-blocking access: Access to resources in the AUTOSAR OS never results in a waiting state,
allowing for efficient task execution without unnecessary delays.


=== Page 148 ===
Exploring the AUTOSAR OS architecture 129
The following code snippet illustrates the usage and locking of resources within the AUTOSAR
framework, specifically highlighting the implementation of a critical section to ensure exclusive access
to a particular resource:
#define RESOURCE_ID 1
TASK(Task1)
{
GetResource(RESOURCE_ID);
// Critical section, access the shared resource here...
ReleaseResource(RESOURCE_ID);
TerminateTask();
}
In this example, Task1 acquires the resource using GetResource(), accesses the shared resource,
then releases it using ReleaseResource(). During the time Task1 holds the resource, no other
task can acquire the same resource, ensuring exclusive access.
In summary, resource management in the AUTOSAR OS is a critical feature that guarantees safe and
efficient sharing of resources across tasks and ISRs, paving the way for effective, concurrent execution
in real-time systems.
Hooks
Hooks in AUTOSAR are callout functions that users can implement to customize and extend the
behavior of the OS at specific points during its execution. These hooks serve as entry points for user-
defined code and are designed to be called by the AUTOSAR OS when certain events or conditions
occur. Hooks are particularly useful for detecting issues, debugging, and performing additional actions
in response to critical events.
Hooks can be used in various scenarios and are typically categorized based on the specific state or
event they are associated with. Some of the commonly used hooks in AUTOSAR include shutdown
hooks, task execution hooks, and error hooks. Let’s take a look at these:
• Task/ISR execution hooks: Task execution hooks are called before and after the execution of
each task within the AUTOSAR OS. These hooks provide insight into the task execution flow
and can be used to monitor task behavior, collect run-time information, or perform additional
checks. Task execution hooks are useful for profiling, performance monitoring, and detecting
anomalies or errors during task execution.
• Shutdown hooks: Shutdown hooks are called when the system is shutting down or entering
a low-power state. They allow users to perform cleanup tasks, save critical data, or gracefully
shut down system components before the system powers off. Shutdown hooks can be used to
trigger data storage in non-volatile memory (NVM), release resources, or ensure the system
is in a safe state for shutdown.


=== Page 149 ===
130 Getting Started with the AUTOSAR Operating System
• Error hooks: Error hooks are triggered when an error condition occurs within the AUTOSAR
OS or when critical errors are detected. These hooks allow users to capture error information,
perform error-handling routines, and take appropriate actions to mitigate the impact of
errors. Error hooks can be used to log error messages, generate error reports, or initiate error
recovery procedures.
Hooks are beneficial in AUTOSAR systems as they provide a means to extend the functionality of the
OS and incorporate user-defined code at critical points. They enable users to monitor system behavior,
gather diagnostic information, and take corrective actions when necessary. By implementing hooks,
developers can enhance system observability, facilitate troubleshooting, and improve the overall
reliability and robustness of the AUTOSAR-based software.
It is important to note that the implementation and usage of hooks should be carefully considered,
as they introduce additional code and execution overhead. Hooks should be designed to be efficient,
non-blocking, and have minimal impact on system performance. Careful testing and validation of
hook functions are essential to ensure they do not introduce unintended side effects or compromise
system stability.
Summary
In this chapter, we explored the role of the AUTOSAR OS in automotive software development. We
discussed its architecture, RTOS, and the OSEK standard. By understanding the role of RTOS in the
automotive industry, you have gained a deeper understanding of the importance of precise time and
resource management. The AUTOSAR OS, with its priority-based scheduling, fast interrupt processing,
and inter-task communication capabilities, equips you to develop high-performance and time-critical
automotive software systems. Exploring the influence of the OSEK standard on the AUTOSAR OS
has provided you with insights into addressing automotive constraints through preemptive and
non-preemptive scheduling, as well as event-driven task synchronization. These features enable you
to design and optimize the execution and timing requirements of tasks, ensuring optimal performance
within automotive systems.
Furthermore, you have familiarized yourself with essential elements of the AUTOSAR OS, such as
tasks, alarms, events, services, scheduling, resources, and interrupts. This knowledge empowers you
to effectively configure and manage these components, facilitating task execution, synchronization,
and resource allocation in ECUs. You can synchronize and handle state transitions of extended tasks
through assigned events, enhancing the overall functionality and coordination of your software
components. Additionally, understanding resource management ensures coordinated access and
conflict prevention in shared resources, optimizing system efficiency and reliability.


=== Page 150 ===
Questions 131
You are now well equipped to apply your expertise in real-world automotive software development
scenarios. Your understanding of the AUTOSAR OS, RTOS, task management, synchronization,
and resource allocation will contribute to the design and development of robust, efficient, and safe
automotive systems.
The next chapter will delve into an in-depth exploration of the application layer, the RTE, and how
software components are designed within the AUTOSAR framework.
Questions
1. Describe the main objects an AUTOSAR OS consists of.
2. What is the difference between a basic task and an extended task?
3. When do you select FULL or NON as a task property in the OS configurator?
4. How can we protect a shared resource?


=== Page 151 ===
(blank)


=== Page 152 ===
7
Exploring the
Communication Stack
The communication stack is a central pillar of the AUTOSAR framework, intricately weaving together
diverse modules to create a harmonious symphony of data exchange and functional integration. As
we navigate through this chapter, our expedition will concentrate on the various modules constituting
the AUTOSAR communication stack and their significance in facilitating communication protocols
within an automotive electronic control unit (ECU).
At the heart of our discourse lies the intricate design, organization, and functional dynamics of these
modules. Delving into their very fabric, we aspire to uncover how they interface with one another. This
chapter focuses on dissecting each layer of the communication stack and shedding light on its purpose
and design considerations, examining its modules, unraveling their intricate interdependencies, and
introducing key terms such as messages, frame, protocol data unit (PDU), and signal.
We will be covering the following topics:
• What is the COM stack?
• COM stack overview
• Network management
Let’s dive in and explore what the COM stack is and why it’s one of the most essential stacks in an
automotive ECU.

